How to Play Armchair Cricket
============================

Armchair Cricket is a card game for two players carefully designed to
capture the major aspects of a real cricket match.  Players alternate as
batsmen and bowlers, trying to score more runs than the other side.

A player can captain a certain side by changing to the seasonal statistics
screen (4 on the main menu) and pressing the number of the desired side.
The other sides are captained by the computer, with varying abilities and
tendencies.  Some sides tend to be better at first-class matches, some
better at the limited-overs game.  (See below for each side's general
tendencies.)

The game is played with two identical packs of 55 cards, each made up of
five suits of 11 cards numbered from 1 to 11.  The suits are pads, bats,
balls, stumps, and gloves.

Both packs of cards are shuffled together and seven cards are dealt to
each player.  The remaining cards constitute the pickup pile.  This is the
only time the cards are dealt in the entire match.

A coin is tossed for choice of innings.  The winner, after studying his
cards, either elects to bat or to bowl.  Both players then throw away an
unwanted card, bowler first, to start a discard pile.  The bowler's
discard will determine the no-ball suit in the first over.  (An over
consists of six balls bowled consecutively.)

Play commences when the bowler bowls the first ball by playing one of his
six cards onto the discard pile.  The bowler can allow the computer to
select a play by pressing the equals key (=).  The card he plays is
replaced by the top card from the pickup pile.  To avoid being out the
batsman has three basic choices open to him:

(1) He may play a card of a different suit to the bowler's which is equal
    or higher in number.  (This signifies that he has allowed the ball to
    pass to the wicketkeeper, unless a 10 or 11 is used in which case the
    ball has beaten the bat but failed to take a wicket.)
(2) He may play a card of the same suit which is equal or lower in number.
    (This signifies a defensive stroke or one which has not penetrated the
    field.)
(3) He may play a card of the same suit which is higher in number.  This
    will score runs according to the following table:

batsman's card superior by:  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10
     number of runs scored:  1   1   1   2   2   3   4   4   4   6

The batsman can also allow the computer to select a play by pressing the
equals key (=).  The card the batsman plays on top of the bowler's card is
replaced by the top card from the pickup pile.  Once a card has been
played by either player it may not be changed.  Play continues in this
fashion, ball by ball, over by over, until there are no cards left to pick
up.

One suit becomes no-balls for each over of the game.  The last ball of
every over determines the no-ball suit for the following over.  If the
bowler bowls a card of he prohibited suit, the umpire calls "no-ball", and
the batsman may do one of three things:

(1) Not play any card and score 1 no-ball (counting as a run).
(2) Hit the no-ball for runs by playing a higher card in any suit.
(3) Discard any card, even if it would normally result in a lost wicket,
    and score 1 no-ball.

A no-ball does not count as one of the over, so an extra ball must be
bowled to complete the over.  The last ball bowled in one innings
determines the no-ball suit for the first over of the next innings.

A wide occurs when the bowler bowls a card which is the same number as the
card on top of the discard pile, regardless of suit.  The umpire calls
"wide", and the batsman has the option of not playing any card.  This will
allow him to score 1 wide, unless the cards involved are 11s, in which
case 4 wides are scored.  The batsman may also play a card as normal, in
which case the "wide" call is revoked.  A wide does not count as one of
the over.

A bye occurs when the bowler bowls a card which is one higher in number
than the card on top of the discard pile, regardless of suit.  The umpire
calls "bye", and the batsman scores byes, without playing a card,
according to the following table:

number of bowler's card:  2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11
  number of byes scored:  1   1   2   2   3   4   4   4   4   4

If a bowler plays an 11 of the same suit of the card which has apparently
given away 4 wides or 4 byes, only 1 wide or no byes will be scored.
(This signifies that the wicket-keeper made a superb stop.)

When the pickup pile is exhausted, all except the top card of the discard
pile is shuffled and cut to form a new pickup pile.  Play then continues
as before.

A wicket falls whenever the batsman plays a card of a different suit to
the bowler's which is lower in number.  The suits of the bowler's and
batsman's cards determine how the batsman is dismissed.  A new batsman
takes the place of the dismissed batsman, and the batting side is allowed
to change up to two cards before the next ball is bowled.

Batsmen numbered 6, 7 and 8 cannot use a 1 to defend against a higher card
in the same suit.  Batsmen numbered 9, 10 and 11 cannot use a 1 or a 2 to
defend against a higher card in the same suit.  (This results in
lower-order batsmen having less batting ability.)

In a first-class match (armchair.exe), each side plays two innings.  An
innings is completed when ten wickets have fallen or when the batting side
declare the innings closed.  To win, a player must score more runs than in
his opponent's two completed innings.  A tie results if the match is
finished with scores level.  If the match is not finished before 24 packs
(by default) have been used, the result is a draw.  A season consists of
each of 8 sides playing each other once.  A win earns 16 points, a tie 8
points, a draw 3, and a loss none.  The winner of the championship is the
side with the most points at the end of a season.

In a limited-overs match (armchail.exe), each side plays one innings of a
maximum of 30 overs (by default).  The winner is the side which scores
more runs.  A knockout tournament consists of 14 matches and a final.  A
side is eliminated when two matches are lost.  A league season consists of
each of 8 sides playing each other once.  A win earns 4 points, a tie 2
points, and a loss none.  The winner of the league is the side with the
most points at the end of a season.  A player can switch between the
knockout and league competitions at any time (8 on the main menu).

The 8 sides in Armchair Cricket are based on the 8 English first-class
county sides that competed from 1890-1892.  Their general tendencies are
as follows:
                     batting        bowling
Gloucestershire      defensive      fast
Kent                 defensive      medium
Lancashire           attacking      slow
Middlesex            attacking      medium
Nottinghamshire      defensive      slow
Surrey               balanced       slow
Sussex               attacking      fast
Yorkshire            balanced       fast

Nottinghamshire are perhaps the toughest first-class side to beat, whereas
Sussex are probably the best limited-overs side.

To get started playing a very short match, run armchail.exe and press 4 at
the main menu.  Press a number from 1 to 8 to pick a side to captain.
Press Enter to return to the main menu, then press 7 to go to the options
screen.  Press 1, 2, and 3 to switch off the no-ball, wide, and bye rules
(these can be introduced one by one when the basic game is mastered).
Press 4 to change the number of players per side, then enter a number like
4 or 5 (a lower number will produce a shorter match).  Notice that the
number of overs per innings will change automatically.  Press 6 and 7
repeatedly to change the skill level of the computer's batting and bowling
("league" is a good first choice for both, but these can always be
adjusted if winning is too easy or too difficult).  Press Enter to return
to the main menu, then press 8 to switch to the league competition.  Press
2 to begin the first round.  Three other matches will also be played.
After the round is completed, the new points table will be shown.  Press
Enter to return to the main menu, then press 6 and 1 to save the season to
a file.  Enter a filename (like cric01).  The saved season can then be
restored and continued later from the save/restore menu.

Prior knowledge of the game of cricket is not necessary to enjoy Armchair
Cricket, but it does add to the fun.  To find out more about the real game
of cricket, see <http://www.ozsports.com.au/cricket/cricket_exp.html>.

Please e-mail any questions about these programs to <honky98@aggies.org>.
